REPUBLIKA.CO.ID, JAKARTA -- Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Kono will visit Indonesia to attend several bilateral meetings in the context of the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Indonesia and Japan. He was scheduled to arrive in Jakarta on Sunday (June 24).

Kono will attend a series of meetings with representatives of the Indonesian government, including President Joko Widodo, Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi and Coordinating Maritime Affairs Minister Luhut Pandjaitan, as well as ASEAN Secretary General Lim Jock Hoi on Monday (June 25).

Foreign Ministry's spokesman Arrmanatha Nasir stated during a press briefing in Jakarta on Friday that the meetings will focus on economic cooperation, although international issues will also be part of the discussions.

"A specific issue is related to the review of the Indonesia-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement (IJEPA), which was first initiated in 2007 and being reviewed every five years," he noted.

Also read: Trade ministry expands Indonesian products export to Japan

With regard to the IJEPA review process, Indonesia will lay greater emphasis on automotive products while Japan is focusing more on agricultural products.

The meeting between the two foreign ministers -- Kono and Marsudi -- will provide a political push for the IJEPA review to be completed soon, Nasir remarked.

"We hope that it would finish sooner, if possible, this year. However, that depends on the negotiation process between the two countries," he added.

Among topics of discussion during Kono's visit to Indonesia includes improving cooperation in infrastructure development, tourism investment, and maritime, particularly on the plan to develop integrated fishery centers in the outer islands of Indonesia.

"We want to offer to make Indonesia as Japan's industrial hub, considering our strategic location and the size of Indonesia's economy," Nasir stated.

Japan is Indonesia's important economic partner with increasing amount of investment and trade almost every year. Japan's total investment in Indonesia had reached US$5 billion in 2017, while the trade balance was recorded at $33 billion.

Indonesia exports oil, liquefied natural gas, coal, plywood, textiles, and shrimp to Japan. Meanwhile, the country imports spare parts, chemical plastic products, and steel from Japan.

Sumber : Antara